*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK 54254 ***

Transcriber's note

This e-book has been transcribed from the author's hand-written
manuscript, downloaded from the British Library. The original text and
the pagination have both been retained. For the reader's convenience an
edited version follows, where punctuation, capitalisation and spelling
have been normalised.

The following changes have been made to both the original and the
edited version:

Leaf numbers, as they appear in the original, are shown in [brackets].

The name "ODonell" was changed to "O'Donell".

Ampersand (&) was changed to "and".




                   [1] The Search after Happiness

                              A Tale by C
                                Bronte

                      August the seventeenth 1829




                         [2] THE SEARCH AFTER
                               HAPINESS

                               A TALE BY
                               CHARLOTTE
                                BRONTE

                          PRINTED BY HERSELF
                                  AND
                                SOLD BY
                            NOBODY &ct &ct

                                AUGUST
                                  THE
                              SEVENTEENTH
                           EIGHTEEN HUNDRED
                                AND on
                              Twenty nine




Preface


The persons meant by the Chief of the city and his Sons are the Duke of
Wellington the Marquis of Duro and Lord Wellesly the city is the Glass
town Henry O'Donell and Alexander Delancy are Captain Tarry-not-at-home
and Monsieur Like-to-live-in-lonely-places

  Charlotte Bronte

  August the 17
  1829




[3] A TALE BY

CB July 28 1829

The search after happiness

chapter I


NOT many years ago there lived in a certain city a person of the name
of Henry O'Donell, in figure he was tall of a dark complexion and
searching black eye, his mind was strong and unbending his disposition
uncosiable and though respected by many he was loved by few. the
city where he resided was very great and magnificent it was governed
by a warior a mighty man of valour whose deeds had resounded to the
ends of the earth. this soldier had 2 son's who were at that time of
the seperate age's of 6 and 7 years Henry--O'Donell was a nobleman
of great consequence in the city and a peculiar favourite with the
governor before whose glance his stern mind would bow and at his comand
O'Donells selfwill would be overcome and while playing with the young
princes he would forget his usual sulleness of demeanour the day's of
his childhood returned upon him and he would be a merry as the youngest
who was gay indeed. one day at court a quarrel ensued between him and
another noble words came to blows and O'Donell struck his oponent a
violent blow on the left cheek at this the miliatry King started up and
commanded O'Donell to apologize this he imediatly did, but from that
hour the spell of discontent seemed to have been cast over him and he
resolved to quit the city. the evening before he put this resolution
into practise he had an interview with the King and returned quite an
altered man. before he seemed stern and intractable now he was only
meditative and sorrowful as he was passing the inner court of the
palace he perceived the 2 young princes at play he called them and they
came runing to him. I am going far from this city and shall most likely
never see you again said O'Donell. where are you going? I canot tell
then why do you go away from us why do you go from your own house and
lands from this great and splendid city to you know not where because I
am not happy here. And if you are not happy here where you have every
thing for which you can whish do you expect to be happy when you are
dying of hunger or thirst in a desert or longing for the society of men
when you are thousands of miles of miles From any human being. how do
you know that that will be my case? it is very likely that it will. and
if it was I am determined to go. take this then that you may sometimes
rememberus when you dwell with only the wild beast of the desert or
the great eagle of the mountain, said they as they each gave him a
curling lock of their hair yes I will take it my princes and I shall
rember you and the mighty warrior King your father even when the angel
of Death has stretched forth his bony arm against me and I am within
the confines of his dreary kingdom the cold damp grave replied O'Donell
as the tears rushed to his eyes and he once more embraced the little
princes and then quitted them it might be for ever----




CHAPTER. THE II


THE Dawn of the next morning found O'Donell on the sumit of a High
mountain which overlooked the city he had stopped to take a farewell
view of the place of his nativity. all along the eastern horizon there
was a rich glowing light which as it rose gradually melted into the
pale blue of the sky in which just over the light there was still
visible the silver crescent of the moon in a short time the sun began
to rise in golden glory casting his splendid radiance over all the
face of nature and illuminating the magnificent city in the midst of
which towering in silent grandeur there appeared the Palace where
dwelt the mighty Prince of that great and beautiful city. all around
the brazen gates and massive walls of which there flowed the majestic
stream of the Guadima whose Banks where bordered by splendid palaces
and magnificent gardens behind these stretching for many a league were
fruitful plains and forests whose shade seemed almost impenetrable to
a single ray of light while in the distace blue mountains were seen
raising their heads to the sky and forming a misty girdle to the plains
of Dahomey. on the whole of this grand and beautiful prospect [4]
O'Donells gaze was long and fixed but his last look was to the palace
of the King and a tear stood in his eye as he said ernestly may he be
preserved from all evil may good attend him and may the cheif Geni
spread their broad sheild of protection over him all the time of his
sojourn in this wearisome world. then turning round he began to decend
the mountain he pursued his way till the sun began to wax hot when
he stopped and sitting down he took out some provisions which he had
brought with him and which consisted of a few biscuits and dates while
he was eating a tall man came up and acosted him O'Donell requested
him to sit beside him and offered him a biscuit this he refused and
taking one out of a small bag which he carried he sat down and they
began to talk. In the course of conversation O'Donell learnt that this
mans name was ALexander DeLancy that he was a native of France and
that he was engaged in the same pursuit with himself i-e the search
of happiness they talked for along time and at last agreed to travel
together then rising they pursued their journey towards night fall
they lay down in the open air and slept soundly till morning when they
again set off and thus they continued till the 3 day when about 2 hours
after noon they aproached an old castle which they entred and as they
were examining it they discovered a subteaneous passage which they
could not see the end of Let us follow where this passage leads us and
perhaps we may find happiness here said O'Donell Delancy agreed the
2 stepped into the opening imediately they a great stone was rolled
to the mouth of the passage with a noise like thunder which shut out
all but a single ray daylight. "What is that! exclaimed O'Donell "I
cannot tell," replied DeLancy "but never mind I supose it is only some
genius playing tricks" "Well it may be so returned O'Donell and they
proceeded on their way after traveling for a long time as near as they
could reckon about 2 days they perceived a silvery streak of light
on the walls of the passage something like the light of the moon in
a short time they came to the end of the passage and leaping out of
the opening which formed they entred a new world they where at first
so much bewildred by the different objects which struck their senses
that they almost fainted but at length recovering they had time to see
every thing around them they were upon the top of a rock which was more
than a thousand fathoms high, all beneath them was liquid Mountains
tossed to and fro with horrible confusion roaring and raging with a
tremendous noise and crowned with waves of foam all above them was a
mighty firmament in one part covere with black clouds from which darted
huge and terrible sheets of Lightning in another part an imense globe
of Light like silver was hanging in the sky and several smaller globes
which spakled exceedingly surounded it. in a short time the tempest
which was dreadful beyond description ceased the large black clouds
cleared away the silver globes vanished and another globe whose light
was of a gold colour appeared it was far larger than the former and in
a little time it became so intensely bright that they could no longer
gaze on it so after looking around them for some time they rose and
pursued their journey. they had travelled a long way when they came an
imense forest the trees of which bore a large fruit of a deep purple
colour of which they tasted and found that it was fit for food, they
journeyed in this forest for three days and on the 3 day they entred a
valley or rather a deep glen surounded on each side by tremendous rocks
whose tops where lost in the clouds in this glen they continued for
some time and at last came in sight of a mountain which rose so high
that the could not see the sumit though the sky was quite clear. at
the foot of the mountain there flowed a river of pure water border by
trees which had flowers of a beautiful rose coulour except these trees
nothing was to be seen but black forests and huge rocks rising out of
a wilderness which bore the terrible aspect of devastation and which
stretched as far as the eye could reach in this desolate land no sound
was to be heard, not even cry of the eagle or the scream of the Curlew
but a silence like the silence of the grave reigned over all the face
of nature unbroken except by the murmur of the river as it slowly wound
its course through the desert




[5] CHAPTER THE III


after they had contemplated this scene for some time O'Donell exclaimed
"ALEXANDER Let us abide here what need have we to travel father let us
make this our place of rest"! "We will" replied DeLancy and "this shall
be our abode" added he pointing to a cave at the foot of the mountaine
"It shall" returned--O'Donell as they entered it. in this country they
remained for many long years and passed their time in a maner which
made them completely happy sometimes they would sit upon a high rock
and listen to the hoarse thunder rolling through the sky and making
the mountains to echo and the deserts to ring with its awful voice,
somtimes they would watch the lightning darting across black clouds
and shivering huge fragments of rock in its terrible passage sometimes
they would witness the great glorious orb of gold sink behind the far
distant mountains which girded the horizon and then watch the advance
of grey twilight and the little stars coming forth in beauty and the
silver moon arising in her splendour till the cold dews of night began
to fall and then they would retire to their bed in the cave with
hearts full of joy and thankfulness. one evening they were seated in
this cave by a large Blazing fire of turf which cast its lurid light
to the high arched roof and illuminated the tall and stately pillars
cut by the hand of nature out the stony rock with a cheerful and red
glare that appeared strange in this desolate land which no fires had
ever before visited except those feirce flames of death which flash
from the heavens when robed in the dreadful majesty of thunder. they
were seated in this cave then listening to the howling night wind as
it swept in mournful cadences through the trees of the forest which
encircled the foot of the mount and bordered the stream which flowed
round it. they were quite silent and their thoughts were ocupied by
those that were afar off and whom it was their fate most likely never
more to behold O'Donell was thinking of his noble master and his young
Princes of the thousands of miles which intervened between him and them
and the sad silent tear gushed forth as he ruminated on the happiness
of those times when his master frowned not when the gloom of care gave
place to the smile of freindship when he would talk to him and laugh
with him and be to him not as a brother no no but as a mighty warrior
who relaxing from his haughtiness would now and then converse with
his high officers in a strain of vivacity and playful humour not to
be equalled. next he viewed him in his minds eye at the head of his
army he heared in the ears of his imagination the buzz of expectation
of hope and supposition which humed round him as his penetrating eye
with a still keeness of expression was fixed on the distant ranks of
the enemy then he heard his authorative voice exclam, Onward brave
sons of freedom onward to the battle and lastly his parting words
to him "in prosperity or, in misery In sorrow or in joy In populous
cities or in desolate wildernesses my prayer shall go with you" darted
across his mind with such painful distinctness that he at length gave
way to his uncontrollable greif at the thought that he should never
behold his beloved and mighty comander more and burst into a flood of
tears. What is the matter Henry exclaimed Delancy O nothing nothing
was the reply and they were resuming their tacit thinking when a voice
was heard outside the cavern which broke strangely upon the desolate
silence of that land which for thousands of years had heard no sound
save the howling of the wind through the forest the echoing of the
thunder among mountains or the solitary murmuring of the river if we
except the preseence of O'Donell and Delancy. Listen! cried ALEXANDER
listen! what is that. it is the sound of a mans voice replied Henry and
then snatching up a burning torch he rushed to the mouth of the cave
followed by Delancy when they had got there they saw the figure of a
very old man sitting on the damp wet ground moaning and complaining
bitterly they went up to him at their approach he rose and said are
you human or supernatural beings? they assured him that they were
human. he went on. then why have you taken up your abode in this
land of the grave? O'Donell answered that he would relate to him all
the particulars if he would he would take shelter for the night with
them the old man consented and when they were all assembled round the
cheerful fire O'Donell fulfilled his promise and then requested the old
man to tell them how he came to be travelling there he complied and
began as follows----




[6] CHAPTER the IV


I was the son of a respectable merchant in moussoul my father intended
to bring me up to his own trade but I was idle and did not like. it
one day as I was playing in the street a very old man came up to me
and asked me if I would go with him I asked him where he was going he
replyed that if I would go with him he would show me very wonderful
things this raised my curiosity and I consented he imediatly took me
by the hand and hurried me out of the city of Moussoul so quickly that
my breath was almost stopped and it seemed as if we glided along in
the air for I could hear no sound of our footsteps we continued on our
course for a long time till we came to glen surrounded by very high
mountains how we passed over those mountains I could never tell, in the
middle of the glen there was a small fountain of very clear water my
conducter directed me to drink of it this I did and imediatly I found
myself in a palace the glory of which far exceeds any description which
I can give the tall stately pillars reaching from heaven to earth were
formed of the fines and pured diamonds the pavement sparkling with
gold and precious stones and the mighty dome made solem and awful by
its stupendous magnitude was of a single emerald. in the midst of this
grand and magnificent palace was a lamp like the sun the radiance of
which made all the palace to flash and glitter with an almost fearful
grandeur the ruby sent a stream forth of crimson light the topaz gold
the saphire intensest purple and the dome poured a flood of deep
clear splendour which overcame all the other gaudy lights by its mild
triumphant glory in this palace were thousands and tens of thousand of
faires and geni some of whom flitted lightly among the blazing lamps to
the sound of unearthly music which dyed and swelled in a strain of wild
grandeur suited to the words they sung--

    in this fairy land of light
    no mortal ere has been
    and the dreadful grandeu of this sight
    by them hath not been seen

    t'would strike them shudering to the earth
    like the flash from a thunder cloud
    it would quench their light and joyous mirth
    and fit them for the shroud

    the rising of our palaces
    like visions of the deep
    and the glory of their structure
    no mortal voice can speak

    the music of our songs
    and our mighty trumpets swell
    and the sounding of our silver harps
    no mortal tongue can tell

    of us they know but little
    save when the storm doth rise
    and the mighty waves are tossing
    agains the arched skys

    [7] then oft they see us striding
    o'e'r the billows snow white foam
    or hear us speak in thunder
    when we stand in grandeur lone

    on the darkest of the mighty clouds
    which veil the pearly moon
    around us lightning flashing
    nights blackness to illume

    chorus the music of our songs
           and our mighty trumpets
           swell and the sounding of our silver
           harp no mortal tongue can tell

when they had finished their was a dead silence for about half an
hour and then the palace began slowly and gradualy to vanish till
it disapeared intirely and I found myself in the glen surounded by
high mountains the fountain illuminated by the cold light of the moon
springing up in the middle of the valley and standing close by was the
old man who had conducted me to this enchanted place he turned round
and I could see that his countenance had an expression of strange
severity which I had not before observed. Follow me he said I obeyed
and we began to ascend the mountain it would be needless to trouble you
with a repititon of all my adventures suffice it to say that after two
months time we arrived at a large temple we entred it the interior as
well as the outside had a very gloomy and ominous aspect being intirely
built of black marble the old man suddenly seized me and dragged me
to an altar at the upper end of the temple then forcing me down on my
knees he made me swear that I would be his servant forever and this
promise I faithfully kept notwithstanding the dreadful scenes of magic
of which every day of my life I was forced to be a witness one day
he told me that he would discharge me from the oath I had taken and
comanded me to leave his service I obeyed and after wandering about the
world for many years I one evening laid myself down on a little bank by
the roadside intending to pass the night there suddenly I felt myself
raised in the air by invisible hands in a short time I lost sight of
the earth and continued on my course through the clouds till I became
insensible and when I recovered from my swoon I found myself lying
outside this cave what may be my future destiny I know not----




CHAPTER the V


When the old man had finished his tale O'Donell and Delancy thanked
him for the relation adding at the same time that they had never heard
anything half so wonderful then as it was very late they all retired
to rest next morning O'Donell awoke very early and looking round the
cave he perceived the bed of leaves on which the old man had lain to be
empty the rising he went out of the cave the sky was covered with red
fiery clouds except those in the east whose edges were tinged with the
bright rays of the morning sun as they strove to hide its glory with
their dark veil of vapours now all beauty and radiance by the golden
line of light which sreaked their gloomy surface beneath this storm
portending sky and far off to the westward rose two tremendous rocks
whose sumits were enveloped with black clouds rolling one above another
with an awful magnificence well suited to the land of wilderness and
mountain which they canopied gliding along in the air between these
two rocks was a chariot of light and in the chariot sat a figure the
expression of whose countenance was that of the old man armed with the
majesty and might of a spirit O'Donell stood at the mouth of the cave
watching it till it vanished and then calling Delancy he related the
circumstance to him [8] some years after this ALexander went out one
morning in search of the fruit on which they subsisted noon came and
he had not returned evening and still no tidings of him O'Donell began
to be alarmed and set out in search of him but could no where find him
one whole day he spent in wandering about the rocks and mountains and
in the evening he came back to his cave weary and faint with hunger and
thirst days weeks months passed away and no Delancy apeared O'Donell
might now Be said to be truly miserable he would sit on a rock for
hours together and cry out ALexander ALexander but receive no answer
except the distant echoing of his voice among the rocks sometimes
he fancied it was another person answering him and he would listen
ernestly till it dyed awey then sinking into utter despair again he
woul sit till the dews of night began to fall when he would retire to
his cave to pass the night in unquiet broken slumbers or in thinking
of his beloved commander whom he could never see more in one of these
dreadful intervals he took up a small parcel and opening it he saw
lying before him two locks of soft culy hair shing like--burnished
gold he gazed on them for a little and thought of the words of those
who gave them to him--take this then that you may rember us when you
dewll with only the wild beast of the desert and the great eagle of
the mountain he burst into a flood of tears he wrung his hands sorrow
and in the anguish of the moment he wished that he could once more
see them and the mighty Warrior King their father if it cost him his
life just at that instant a loud clap of thunder shook the roof of
the cave a sound like the rushing of the wind was heard and a mighty
genius stood before him I know thy wish cried he with a loud and
terrible voice and I will grant it in 2 months time thou returnest
to the castle wence thou camest hither and surrenderest thyself into
my power O'Donell promised that he would and instantly he found
himself at the door of the old castle and in the land of his birth
he pursued his journey for three days and on the 3. day he arrived
at the mountain which overlooked the city it was a beautiful evening
in the month of September and the full moon was shedding her traquil
light on all the face of nature the city was lying in its splendour
and magnificence surrounded by the broad stream of the Guadima the
palace was majestically towering in the midst of it and all its pillars
and battlements eemed in the calm light of the moon as if they were
transformed into siver by the touch of a fairys wand O'Donell staid not
long to contemplate this beautiful scene but decending the mountain
he soon crossed the fertile plain which led to the city and entering
the gates he quickly arrived at the palace without speaking to any one
he entred the iner court of the palace by a seecret way with which he
was acquainted and then going up a flight of steps and crossing a long
gallery he arrived at the Kings private apartment the door was half
open he looked and beheld 2 very handsome young men sitting together
and reading he instantly recgonized them and was going to step forward
when the door opened and the Great Duke entred O'Donell could contain
himself no longer but rushing in he threw himself at the feet of his
Grace O'Donell is this you exclaimed the Duke it is my most noble
master answered O'Donell almost choking with joy the young princes
instantly embraced him while he almost smothered them with [9] caresses
after a while they became tranquil and then O'Donell at the request
of the Duke related all his adventures since he parted with them not
omiting the condition on which he was now in the palace when he had
ended a loud voice was heard saying that he was free from his promise
and might spend the rest of his days in his native city sometime after
this as O'Donell was walking in the streets he met a gentleman who he
thought he had seen before but could not recolect where or under what
circumstances after a little conversation he discovered that he was
ALexander Delancy that he was now a rich merchant in the city of Paris
and high in favour with the emperor Napoleon as may be suposed they
both were equally delighted at the discovery they ever after lived
hapily in their seperate cities and so ends my little tale.

  C Bronte August the 17
  1829




Contents


Chap I character of O'Donell cause of his travels

Chap II set out meeting Delancy coming to the old castle entreing the
new world description

Chap III coming to the cave maner of life arrival of the old man

Chap VI old mans tale

Chap V Departure of the old man disapearance of Delancy transportation
of O'Donell his arrival at the city his arrival at the palace; his
interview with his cheif he finds Delancy end


FINIS




                            EDITED VERSION

Preface

The persons meant by the Chief of the city and his Sons are the Duke
of Wellington, the Marquis of Duro and Lord Wellesly. The city is
the Glass town. Henry O'Donell and Alexander Delancy are Captain
Tarry-not-at-home and Monsieur Like-to-live-in-lonely-places.

Charlotte Bronte

August the 17 1829


[3] A TALE BY

CB July 28 1829

The search after happiness

Chapter I

NOT many years ago there lived in a certain city a person of the name
of Henry O'Donell. In figure he was tall, of a dark complexion and
searching black eye, his mind was strong and unbending, his disposition
unsociable and though respected by many he was loved by few. The city
where he resided was very great and magnificent. It was governed by a
warrior, a mighty man of valour whose deeds had resounded to the ends
of the earth. This soldier had two sons who were at that time of the
separate ages of six and seven years.

Henry O'Donell was a nobleman of great consequence in the city and a
peculiar favourite with the governor, before whose glance his stern mind
would bow and at his command O'Donell's selfwill would be overcome,
and while playing with the young princes he would forget his usual
sullenness of demeanour; the days of his childhood returned upon him and
he would be as merry as the youngest, who was gay indeed.

One day at court, a quarrel ensued between him and another noble, words
came to blows and O'Donell struck his opponent a violent blow on the
left cheek. At this the military King started up and commanded O'Donell
to apologize. This he immediately did, but from that hour the spell of
discontent seemed to have been cast over him and he resolved to quit
the city. The evening before he put this resolution into practice,
he had an interview with the King and returned quite an altered man.
Before he seemed stern and intractable, now he was only meditative
and sorrowful. As he was passing the inner court of the palace, he
perceived the two young princes at play. He called them and they came
running to him.

"I am going far from this city and shall most likely never see you
again," said O'Donell.

"Where are you going?"

"I cannot tell."

"Then why do you go away from us, why do you go from your own house and
lands, from this great and splendid city to you know not where?"

"Because I am not happy here."

"And if you are not happy here where you have every thing for which
you can wish, do you expect to be happy when you are dying of hunger
or thirst in a desert or longing for the society of men, when you are
thousands of miles, of miles from any human being?"

"How do you know that that will be my case?"

"It is very likely that it will."

"And if it was, I am determined to go."

"Take this then that you may sometimes remember us when you dwell with
only the wild beast of the desert or the great eagle of the mountain,"
said they as they each gave him a curling lock of their hair.

"Yes, I will take it my princes and I shall remember you and the mighty
warrior King your father, even when the angel of Death has stretched
forth his bony arm against me and I am within the confines of his
dreary kingdom, the cold damp grave," replied O'Donell, as the tears
rushed to his eyes and he once more embraced the little princes and
then quitted them, it might be for ever----


CHAPTER THE II

THE Dawn of the next morning found O'Donell on the summit of a high
mountain which overlooked the city. He had stopped to take a farewell
view of the place of his nativity. All along the eastern horizon, there
was a rich glowing light, which, as it rose, gradually melted into the
pale blue of the sky, in which, just over the light, there was still
visible the silver crescent of the moon. In a short time the sun began
to rise in golden glory casting his splendid radiance over all the
face of nature and illuminating the magnificent city in the midst of
which, towering in the silent grandeur, there appeared the Palace where
dwelt the mighty Prince of that great and beautiful city, all around
the brazen gates and massive walls of which there flowed the majestic
stream of the Guadima whose banks were bordered by splendid palaces and
magnificent gardens. Behind these stretching for many a league were
fruitful plains and forests whose shade seemed almost impenetrable to
a single ray of light, while in the distance blue mountains were seen
raising their heads to the sky and forming a misty girdle to the plains
of Dahomey. On the whole of this grand and beautiful prospect, [4]
O'Donell's gaze was long and fixed but his last look was to the palace
of the King and a tear stood in his eye as he said earnestly, "May he
be preserved from all evil. May good attend him and may the chief Genie
spread their broad shield of protection over him all the time of his
sojourn in this wearisome world."

Then turning round he began to descend the mountain. He pursued his
way till the sun began to wax hot when he stopped and, sitting down,
he took out some provisions which he had brought with him and which
consisted of a few biscuits and dates. While he was eating, a tall man
came up and accosted him. O'Donell requested him to sit beside him and
offered him a biscuit. This he refused, and taking one out of a small
bag which he carried, he sat down and they began to talk. In the course
of conversation O'Donell learnt that this man's name was Alexander
Delancy, that he was a native of France, and that he was engaged in the
same pursuit with himself, i.e. the search of happiness. They talked
for a long time and at last agreed to travel together. Then, rising,
they pursued their journey. Towards nightfall they lay down in the open
air and slept soundly till morning, when they again set off and thus
they continued till the 3rd day, when about two hours after noon they
approached an old castle which they entered and as they were examining
it, they discovered a subterraneous passage, which they could not see
the end of.

"Let us follow where this passage leads us and perhaps we may find
happiness here," said O'Donell.

Delancy agreed; the two stepped into the opening. Immediately a great
stone was rolled to the mouth of the passage with a noise like thunder
which shut out all but a single ray of daylight.

"What is that!" exclaimed O'Donell.

"I cannot tell," replied Delancy "but never mind. I suppose it is only
some genius playing tricks."

"Well, it may be so," returned O'Donell and they proceeded on their way.

After travelling for a long time, as near as they could reckon about
two days, they perceived a silvery streak of light on the walls of the
passage, something like the light of the moon. In a short time they
came to the end of the passage, and, leaping out of the opening which
formed, they entered a new world.

They were at first so much bewildered by the different objects which
struck their senses that they almost fainted, but at length recovering
they had time to see everything around them. They were upon the top of
a rock which was more than a thousand fathoms high. All beneath them
was liquid mountains tossed to and fro with horrible confusion, roaring
and raging with a tremendous noise and crowned with waves of foam.
All above them was a mighty firmament, in one part covered with black
clouds from which darted huge and terrible sheets of lightning, in
another part an immense globe of light like silver was hanging in the
sky and several smaller globes which sparkled exceedingly surrounded it.

In a short time the tempest which was dreadful beyond description
ceased, the large black clouds cleared away, the silver globes
vanished, and another globe whose light was of a gold colour appeared.
It was far larger than the former and in a little time it became so
intensely bright that they could no longer gaze on it, so after looking
around them for some time they rose and pursued their journey.

They had travelled a long way, when they came to an immense forest,
the trees of which bore a large fruit of a deep purple colour of which
they tasted and found that it was fit for food. They journeyed in this
forest for three days and on the 3rd day they entered a valley or
rather a deep glen surrounded on each side by tremendous rocks, whose
tops were lost in the clouds. In this glen they continued for some
time and at last came in sight of a mountain which rose so high that
they could not see the summit though the sky was quite clear. At the
foot of the mountain, there flowed a river of pure water bordered by
trees which had flowers of a beautiful rose colour. Except these trees
nothing was to be seen but black forests and huge rocks rising out of
a wilderness which bore the terrible aspect of devastation and which
stretched as far as the eye could reach. In this desolate land no sound
was to be heard, not even cry of the eagle or the scream of the curlew,
but a silence, like the silence of the grave, reigned over all the face
of nature unbroken except by the murmur of the river as it slowly wound
its course through the desert.


[5] CHAPTER THE III

After they had contemplated this scene for some time O'Donell
exclaimed, "Alexander, let us abide here. What need have we to travel
farther? let us make this our place of rest!"

"We will," replied Delancy "and this shall be our abode," added he
pointing to a cave at the foot of the mountain.

"It shall," returned O'Donell as they entered it.

In this country they remained for many long years and passed their time
in a manner which made them completely happy. Sometimes they would sit
upon a high rock and listen to the hoarse thunder rolling through the
sky and making the mountains to echo and the deserts to ring with its
awful voice. Sometimes they would watch the lightning darting across
black clouds and shivering huge fragments of rock in its terrible
passage. Sometimes they would witness the great glorious orb of gold
sink behind the far distant mountains which girded the horizon and then
watch the advance of grey twilight and the little stars coming forth in
beauty and the silver moon arising in her splendour till the cold dews
of night began to fall and then they would retire to their bed in the
cave with hearts full of joy and thankfulness.

One evening they were seated in this cave by a large blazing fire of
turf which cast its lurid light to the high arched roof and illuminated
the tall and stately pillars cut by the hand of nature out the stony
rock with a cheerful and red glare that appeared strange in this
desolate land, which no fires had ever before visited except those
fierce flames of death, which flash from the heavens when robed in
the dreadful majesty of thunder. They were seated in this cave then
listening to the howling night wind as it swept in mournful cadences
through the trees of the forest, which encircled the foot of the mount
and bordered the stream which flowed round it. They were quite silent
and their thoughts were occupied by those that were afar off and whom
it was their fate most likely never more to behold. O'Donell was
thinking of his noble master and his young Princes, of the thousands of
miles which intervened between him and them, and the sad silent tear
gushed forth as he ruminated on the happiness of those times: when his
master frowned, not when the gloom of care gave place to the smile of
friendship; when he would talk to him and laugh with him and be to him
not as a brother, no no, but as a mighty warrior, who relaxing from
his haughtiness would now and then converse with his high officers
in a strain of vivacity and playful humour not to be equalled. Next
he viewed him in his mind's eye at the head of his army. He heard
in the ears of his imagination the buzz of expectation of hope and
supposition which hummed round him as his penetrating eye with a still
keenness of expression was fixed on the distant ranks of the enemy,
then he heard his authoritative voice exclaim, "Onward brave sons of
freedom, onward to the battle," and lastly his parting words to him,
"In prosperity or in misery, in sorrow or in joy, in populous cities or
in desolate wildernesses my prayer shall go with you," darted across
his mind with such painful distinctness that he at length gave way to
his uncontrollable grief at the thought that he should never behold his
beloved and mighty commander more and burst into a flood of tears.

"What is the matter, Henry?" exclaimed Delancy.

"O nothing, nothing," was the reply, and they were resuming their
tacit thinking, when a voice was heard outside the cavern which broke
strangely upon the desolate silence of that land which for thousands
of years had heard no sound save the howling of the wind through the
forest, the echoing of the thunder among mountains or the solitary
murmuring of the river if we except the presence of O'Donell and
Delancy.

"Listen!" cried Alexander, "listen! What is that?"

"It is the sound of a man's voice," replied Henry and then snatching up
a burning torch, he rushed to the mouth of the cave followed by Delancy.

When they had got there they saw the figure of a very old man, sitting
on the damp wet ground moaning and complaining bitterly. They went up
to him.

At their approach he rose and said, "Are you human or supernatural
beings?"

They assured him that they were human. He went on, "Then why have you
taken up your abode in this land of the grave?"

O'Donell answered that he would relate to him all the particulars, if
he would he would take shelter for the night with them. The old man
consented and when they were all assembled round the cheerful fire,
O'Donell fulfilled his promise and then requested the old man to tell
them how he came to be travelling there. He complied and began as
follows----


[6] CHAPTER the IV

"I was the son of a respectable merchant in Moussoul. My father
intended to bring me up to his own trade but I was idle and did not
like it. One day as I was playing in the street a very old man came
up to me and asked me if I would go with him. I asked him where he
was going. He replied that if I would go with him he would show me
very wonderful things. This raised my curiosity and I consented. He
immediately took me by the hand and hurried me out of the city of
Moussoul so quickly that my breath was almost stopped and it seemed
as if we glided along in the air for I could hear no sound of our
footsteps. We continued on our course for a long time till we came to
a glen surrounded by very high mountains. How we passed over those
mountains, I could never tell. In the middle of the glen there was a
small fountain of very clear water. My conductor directed me to drink
of it. This I did and immediately I found myself in a palace, the glory
of which far exceeds any description which I can give: the tall stately
pillars reaching from heaven to earth were formed of the finest and
purest diamonds, the pavement sparkling with gold and precious stones
and the mighty dome, made solemn and awful by its stupendous magnitude,
was of a single emerald. In the midst of this grand and magnificent
palace was a lamp like the sun, the radiance of which made all the
palace to flash and glitter with an almost fearful grandeur, the ruby
sent a stream forth of crimson light, the topaz gold, the sapphire
intensest purple, and the dome poured a flood of deep clear splendour
which overcame all the other gaudy lights by its mild triumphant glory.
In this palace were thousands and tens of thousands of fairies and
genii, some of whom flitted lightly among the blazing lamps to the
sound of unearthly music which died and swelled in a strain of wild
grandeur suited to the words they sung--

    in this fairy land of light
    no mortal ere has been
    and the dreadful grandeur of this sight
    by them hath not been seen

    'twould strike them shuddering to the earth
    like the flash from a thunder cloud
    it would quench their light and joyous mirth
    and fit them for the shroud

    the rising of our palaces
    like visions of the deep
    and the glory of their structure
    no mortal voice can speak

    the music of our songs
    and our mighty trumpets' swell
    and the sounding of our silver harps
    no mortal tongue can tell

    of us they know but little
    save when the storm doth rise
    and the mighty waves are tossing
    against the arched skies

    [7] then oft they see us striding
    o'er the billows' snow white foam
    or hear us speak in thunder
    when we stand in grandeur lone

    on the darkest of the mighty clouds
    which veil the pearly moon
    around us lightning flashing
    night's blackness to illume

    chorus the music of our songs
           and our mighty trumpets' swell
           and the sounding of our silver
           harp no mortal tongue can tell.

When they had finished, there was a dead silence for about half an
hour and then the palace began slowly and gradually to vanish till
it disappeared entirely and I found myself in the glen surrounded by
high mountains, the fountain illuminated by the cold light of the moon
springing up in the middle of the valley, and standing close by was
the old man who had conducted me to this enchanted place. He turned
round and I could see that his countenance had an expression of strange
severity which I had not before observed. "Follow me," he said. I
obeyed and we began to ascend the mountain. It would be needless to
trouble you with a repetition of all my adventures. Suffice it to say
that after two months time, we arrived at a large temple. We entered
it. The interior as well as the outside had a very gloomy and ominous
aspect being entirely built of black marble. The old man suddenly
seized me and dragged me to an altar at the upper end of the temple,
then, forcing me down on my knees, he made me swear that I would be his
servant forever and this promise I faithfully kept notwithstanding the
dreadful scenes of magic of which every day of my life I was forced
to be a witness. One day he told me that he would discharge me from
the oath I had taken and commanded me to leave his service. I obeyed
and, after wandering about the world for many years, I one evening
laid myself down on a little bank by the roadside intending to pass
the night there. Suddenly I felt myself raised in the air by invisible
hands. In a short time I lost sight of the earth and continued on my
course through the clouds till I became insensible and when I recovered
from my swoon, I found myself lying outside this cave. What may be my
future destiny I know not----"


CHAPTER the V

When the old man had finished his tale, O'Donell and Delancy thanked
him for the relation, adding at the same time that they had never heard
anything half so wonderful. Then as it was very late, they all retired
to rest. Next morning O'Donell awoke very early and, looking round the
cave, he perceived the bed of leaves on which the old man had lain to
be empty. He went out of the cave. The sky was covered with the rising
red fiery clouds except those in the east whose edges were tinged with
the bright rays of the morning sun, as they strove to hide its glory
with their dark veil of vapours, now all beauty and radiance by the
golden line of light which streaked their gloomy surface. Beneath this
storm-portending sky and far off to the westward rose two tremendous
rocks whose summits were enveloped with black clouds rolling one
above another with an awful magnificence well suited to the land of
wilderness and mountain which they canopied. Gliding along in the air
between these two rocks was a chariot of light and in the chariot sat
a figure, the expression of whose countenance was that of the old man
armed with the majesty and might of a spirit. O'Donell stood at the
mouth of the cave watching it till it vanished and then calling Delancy
he related the circumstance to him.

[8] Some years after this, Alexander went out one morning in search of
the fruit on which they subsisted. Noon came and he had not returned,
evening and still no tidings of him. O'Donell began to be alarmed and
set out in search of him but could nowhere find him. One whole day he
spent in wandering about the rocks and mountains and in the evening he
came back to his cave weary and faint with hunger and thirst. Days,
weeks, months passed away and no Delancy appeared. O'Donell might
now be said to be truly miserable. He would sit on a rock for hours
together and cry out "Alexander, Alexander," but receive no answer,
except the distant echoing of his voice among the rocks. Sometimes
he fancied it was another person answering him and he would listen
earnestly till it died away. Then sinking into utter despair again, he
would sit till the dews of night began to fall, when he would retire to
his cave to pass the night in unquiet broken slumbers or in thinking of
his beloved commander, whom he could never see more. In one of these
dreadful intervals, he took up a small parcel and opening it he saw
lying before him two locks of soft curly hair shining like burnished
gold. He gazed on them for a little and thought of the words of those
who gave them to him--"Take this then, that you may remember us when
you dwell with only the wild beast of the desert and the great eagle of
the mountain." He burst into a flood of tears, he wrung his hands in
sorrow, and in the anguish of the moment he wished that he could once
more see them and the mighty Warrior King their father if it cost him
his life. Just at that instant, a loud clap of thunder shook the roof
of the cave, a sound like the rushing of the wind was heard and a
mighty genius stood before him.

"I know thy wish," cried he with a loud and terrible voice "and I will
grant it. In two months' time thou returnest to the castle whence thou
camest hither and surrenderest thyself into my power."

O'Donell promised that he would and instantly he found himself at
the door of the old castle and in the land of his birth. He pursued
his journey for three days and on the third day, he arrived at the
mountain which overlooked the city. It was a beautiful evening in
the month of September and the full moon was shedding her tranquil
light on all the face of nature. The city was lying in its splendour
and magnificence surrounded by the broad stream of the Guadima, the
palace was majestically towering in the midst of it and all its pillars
and battlements seemed in the calm light of the moon as if they were
transformed into silver by the touch of a fairy's wand. O'Donell stayed
not long to contemplate this beautiful scene but, descending the
mountain, he soon crossed the fertile plain which led to the city and
entering the gates he quickly arrived at the palace. Without speaking
to anyone he entered the inner court of the palace by a secret way
with which he was acquainted and then going up a flight of steps and
crossing a long gallery he arrived at the King's private apartment.

The door was half open. He looked and beheld two very handsome young
men sitting together and reading. He instantly recognized them and was
going to step forward, when the door opened and the Great Duke entered.
O'Donell could contain himself no longer but, rushing in, he threw
himself at the feet of his Grace.

"O'Donell, is this you?" exclaimed the Duke.

"It is, my most noble master," answered O'Donell, almost choking with
joy. The young princes instantly embraced him while he almost smothered
them with [9] caresses. After a while they became tranquil, and then
O'Donell at the request of the Duke related all his adventures since
he parted with them not omitting the condition on which he was now in
the palace. When he had ended, a loud voice was heard saying that he
was free from his promise and might spend the rest of his days in his
native city.

Some time after this, as O'Donell was walking in the streets, he met a
gentleman who he thought he had seen before but could not recollect
where or under what circumstances. After a little conversation, he
discovered that he was Alexander Delancy, that he was now a rich
merchant in the city of Paris and high in favour with the emperor
Napoleon. As may be supposed, they both were equally delighted at the
discovery. They ever after lived happily in their separate cities and
so ends my little tale.

C Bronte August the 17 1829


Contents

Chap I Character of O'Donell--cause of his travels

Chap II Set out--meeting Delancy--coming to the old castle--entering the
new world--description

Chap III Coming to the cave--manner of life--arrival of the old man

Chap IV Old man's tale

Chap V Departure of the old man--disappearance of
Delancy--transportation of O'Donell--his arrival at the city--his
arrival at the palace--his interview with his chief--he finds
Delancy--end





End of Project Gutenberg's The Search After Happiness, by Charlotte Bronte

*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK 54254 ***
